watsonx provides out of the box Frontend development tools the user interface (UI) throughout watsonx is designed using IBM’s Design Thinking process to ensure the UI is intuitive and able to be used by many personas - everyone from an expert data scientist, app developer, business analyst, line of business owner, etc. can use the platform.  We also have several tools to automate complex tasks such as autoAI to develop machine learning models with a few clicks.  the Frontend programming languages supported is R. the supported programming tools are RStudio (saas and software), Rshiny Apps (for software). watsonx provides reusable development frameworks. developers can create  plugins  to allow the platform to access data that only exist on prem. all aspects of the platform are available via REST based APIs.  there is a python SDK (and sample notebooks).   The Python library allows you to train, store, and deploy your models, score them using APIs, and finally integrate them with your application development. Learn more here: https://dataplatform.cloud.ibm.com/docs/content/wsj/analyze-data/fm-python-lib.html?context=wx&audience=wdp  Here is the LangChain library: https://ibm.github.io/watsonx-ai-python-sdk/fm_model.html#ibm_watsonx_ai.foundation_models.Model.to_langchain  developers constrain the actions that the AI workflow can perform without user intervention.   Pipelines editor provides a graphical interface for orchestrating an end-to-end flow of assets from to create, train, deploy and update machine learning models and python scripts.   Documentation: https://dataplatform.cloud.ibm.com/docs/content/wsj/analyze-data/ml-orchestration-overview.html?context=wx&audience=wdp  Available through CLI/SDKs which can be integrated to a company's CI/CD. it's easy to deploy the Frontend development with Rshiny apps.   Watsonx platform allows you to create, edit and execute Python and R code using Jupyter notebooks and scripts in code editors, for example the notebook editor or an integrated development environment (IDE), like RStudio. provides various code editor developer experience tools to work with data and models.  Jupyter notebook editor - The Jupyter Notebook editor is largely used for interactive, exploratory data analysis programming and data visualization. Users can use Preinstalled open source libraries that come with the notebook runtime environment, IBM libraries provided at no extra cost that come with the notebook runtime environments and Your own libraries. You can create jobs to run the notebooks directly from the Jupyter Notebook editor. Your job configurations can use environment variables that are passed to the notebooks with different values when the notebooks run.  RStudio IDE - R is a popular statistical analysis and machine-learning package that enables data management and includes tests, models, analyses and graphics. RStudio on watsonx platform provides an integrated development environment for working with R scripts. With RStudio integrated to Projects, you can access and use the data files that are stored in the IBM Cloud Object Storage bucket associated with your project in RStudio.  Federated Learning - Federated Learning provides the tools for multiple remote parties to collaboratively train a single machine learning model without sharing data. Each party trains a local model with a private data set. Only the local model is sent to the aggregator to improve the quality of the global model that benefits all parties. Data format supported includes but not limited to CSV files, JSON files, and databases for PostgreSQL.  Decision Optimisation - Using Python notebooks with DOcplex, a native Python API for Decision Optimization. You need Operational Research (OR) modeling expertise to create variables, objectives, and constraints to represent your problem.  InstructLab - InstructLAB toolkit streamline model training for model instruction tuning with open-source and proprietary skills and knowledge training via a programming interface   Watsonx platform supports a variety of no-code graphical user interfaces and tools to perform various MLOps activities   Data Refinery - Graphical flow editor tool to refine data, by taking tabular data from one location, cleanse and shape it, and then load the result into a different location.   Visualizations - Graphical interactive tool where you can discover insights from your data by creating visualizations. By exploring data from different perspectives with visualizations, you can identify patterns, connections, and relationships within that data and quickly understand large amounts of information.It supports tabular data of various formats like Avro, CSV, JSON, Parquet, TSV, SAV, Microsoft Excel .xls and .xlsx files, SAS, delimited text files. Data can also be accessed via connectors.  Synthetic Data Generator - Graphical flow editor tool Synthetic Data Generator helps to generate synthetic tabular data based on production data or a custom data schema using visual flows and modeling algorithms. With this tool users can mask and mimic production data, load results to a new location. Users can also generate synthetic data from a custom data schema using visual flows and modeling algorithms.  Prompt Lab - Helps users to do prompt engineering and conversational interactions with Foundation Models, making it easy to experiment with and gain insight into the best fitting model or to determine additional fine tuning that may be needed using a GUI.  Tuning Studio - Improves performance of pre-trained foundation models (FM) with parameter efficient fine tuning to train a model to perform a particular task using a click through easy to use GUI.  SPSS Modeler - With SPSS Modeler flows, users can quickly develop predictive models that use business expertise and deploy them into business operations to improve decision making. Designed around the long-established SPSS Modeler client software and the industry-standard CRISP-DM model it uses, the flows interface supports the entire data mining process, from data to better business results.  Decision Optimisation - This tool gives you access to IBM's industry-leading solution engines for mathematical programming and constraint programming. You can build Decision Optimization models with powerful Decision Optimization experiment UI. Here you can import, or create and edit models in Python, in OPL or with natural language expressions provided by the intelligent Modeling Assistant. You can also deploy models with Watson Machine Learning.  AutoAI - The AutoAI graphical tool analyzes your data and uses data algorithms, transformations, and parameter settings to create the best predictive model. AutoAI displays various potential models as model candidate pipelines and rank them on a leaderboard for you to choose from.  Orchestration Pipelines - The Orchestration Pipelines editor provides a graphical interface for orchestrating an end-to-end flow of assets from creation through deployment. Assemble and configure a pipeline to create, train, deploy, and update machine learning models and Python scripts. To design a pipeline that you drag nodes onto the canvas, specify objects and parameters, then run and monitor the pipeline.  InstructLab (In next 12 months) - InstructLAB toolkit streamline model training, with a seamless interface for model instruction tuning with open-source and proprietary skills and knowledge training.  