Watsonx has an Auto AI feature with a graphical interface that analyzes data and uses algorithms, transformations, and parameter settings to create the best predictive model. AutoAI displays various potential models as model candidate pipelines and ranks them on a leaderboard for selection. Watsonx includes out-of-the-box workflows that users can use or they can easily build one through a drag-and-drop interface based on their needs. In addition to workflows, watsonx also includes capabilities to document and track issues associated with models in a single place.  ML models along with different versions of the model can be tracked for build, validation, and training in a lifecycle view.  Users can capture multiple experiments as “runs” and show them in notebooks programmatically.    Watsonx has a visual data modeler that can leverage proprietary algorithms pertaining to time series analysis.  Also, there are proprietary algorithms used to develop the IBM Slate embedding model.  The underlying Watson NLP library used by watsonx platform has several algorithms implemented by IBM Research. Examples include: sentiment target extraction, entity extraction, NLP primitives (parts of speech, dependency parsing). In addition, some of the CPU-only optimizations, and the inclusion of SVM algorithms optimized for parallelism (through SnapML library, which Watson NLP relies on as a multi-cpu and gpu-based parallel implementation of scikit learn). Learn more about IBM Research and innovation here: https://pages.github.ibm.com/ai-foundation/watson-nlp-documentation/research_papers.html  Watsonx notebooks and Auto AI can integrate with any number of open-source algorithms and frameworks.  Watsonx Auto AI feature leverages hyperparameter optimization in the final stage of analysis. It optimizes the parameters of the best performing pipelines from the previous phases by exploring the parameter ranges of these pipelines by using a hyperparameter optimizer called RBFOpt.  Watsonx Auto AI feature assess each pipeline candidate and ranks them for selection by the user.  Models created in the visual modeler component can apply various assessments in the flow and determine best model.  Also, in notebooks, users can calculate assessment metrics and compare them via code. Watsonx Auto AI capability will evaluate and select features for a given ML optimization objective. Also, in notebooks, users can leverage optimization algorithms via code. Watsonx includes capability to evaluate model fairness – both direct and indirect bias - during model training and validation once it is deployed. These fairness evaluations generates a set of 9 out-of-the-box metrics hourly but can also be generated on-demand.  Users can specify thresholds and be alerted when these thresholds are breached. Furthermore, it helps mitigate bias through active and passive de-biasing. Passive de-biasing is automated, regularly monitored, and happens without user intervention. The platform analyzes the model behavior, identifies the data where the model outcome is biased, and de-biases the data. Active-debiasing provides the ability to invoke on demand the ability to understand the debiased prediction of your model and decide to accept the recommendations saving manual data scientist time.  Lastly, watsonx Auto AI can evaluate an experiment for fairness to ensure that results are not biased in favor of one group over another. Watsonx has an NLP library that can be used to fine tune IBM Slate foundation models to perform certain tasks such as classification and extraction.  Watsonx has a Federated Learning feature that provides the tools for multiple remote parties to collaboratively train a single machine learning model without sharing data.   Each party trains a local model with a private data set. Only the local model is sent to the   aggregator   to improve the quality of a global model.  This capability allows clients to comply with data privacy and security rules while training models with different data sources.  It also enables sites with large volumes of data to be collected, cleaned, and trained on an enterprise scale without migration.  