Has the Supplier/Third Party established governance procedures to identify and mitigate privacy risk including compliance risks relating to data privacy legislation and regulations?  yes, https://www.ibm.com/us-en/privacy Has the Supplier/Third Party established governance procedures to identify and mitigate privacy risk including compliance risks relating to data privacy legislation and regulations?  yes, https://www.ibm.com/us-en/privacy Are employees subject to screening prior to employment?yes, IBM's HR processes are set up to screen potential employees Are employees, agents and subcontractors subjected to confidentiality requirements  and are those requirements enforced(e.g through contracts)?yes, IBM's HR processes are set up to screen potential employees If personal information is received from a Supplier or Third Party, can evidence of consent or another lawful justification (as per section 11 of POPIA) be provided to FirstRand by the Supplier or Third Party?yes, Personal information IBM has and uses would be adressed in the link above.  PI on IBM Cloud would be Company's responsibility.   Agents Has the Supplier or Third Party conducted a privacy impact assessment on its agents, sub-contractors and other third parties who may process Company's personal information; and can the Supplier or Third Party confirm that adequate and efffective privacy controls are in place for these agents, sub-contractors and other third parties ?yes, https://www.ibm.com/us-en/privacy Is there a process to govern the selection and management of these agents, sub-contractors and other third parties that process Company's personal information?yes, IBM's HR processes provide for this.   Can the Supplier or Third Party confirm that it concludes agreements with such agents, sub-contractors and other third parties that incorporates data privacy and protection terms?yes, https://www.ibm.com/us-en/privacy Can the Supplier or Third Party confirm that it will only share Company's personal information with such agents, sub-contractors and other third parties to the extent necessary to deliver on the product/service provided to Company?yes, https://www.ibm.com/us-en/privacy Does the Supplier or Third Party have external privacy notices or policies which advises the data subject/individual as to how the Supplier or Third Party uses their personal information( which is aligned to privacy legislation and the  Openess  requirements contained in the Company Data Protection Policy for Suppliers). Note: this is only applicable where the Supplier or Third Party collects personal information directly from an individual on behalf of Company.yes, Yes.  No supplier or 3rd party has access to customer data Data auality Does the Supplier or Third Party adhere to a data retention policy/standard/register that applies to Company's personal information?yes, Yes.  No supplier or 3rd party has access to customer data As it relates to the Supplier or Third Party's processing ofCompany personal information and depending on the services provided to FirstRand, has the Supplier or Third Party implemented data quality controls to ensure that Company's personal information is complete, accurate, not misleading and updated where necessary?yes, Yes.  Supplier does not determine this as no supplier access to customer data  What retention period would the Supplier or Third Party apply to Company's personal information?yes, Yes. Retention period depends on scenarios such as is account active or not.  If active, IBM provides customer data retention options for customer data in an active cloud service.   IBM's 3rd party has no access, customer has full control  Is there a process to ensure that Company's personal information will be returned and deleted with the required destruction certificates at termination of the agreement with FirstRand?yes, Within 30 days data is deleted.  Return option provided as well. Privacy Incident Controls  Is there a privacy incident management process is in place to notify Company in the event of a privacy incident?yes, IBM Cloud follows the IBM Product Security Incident Response Team (PSIRT) process for security incident management. IBM PSIRT is the centralized process through which IBM customers, security researchers, industry groups, government organizations, or vendors report potential IBM security vulnerabilities. A global team manages the receipt, investigation and internal coordination of security vulnerability information related to all IBM products and websites. This team then coordinates with each individual IBM product and solution team across the world to investigate, and if needed, identify the appropriate response plan. Maintaining communication between all involved parties, both internal and external, is a key component of IBM's vulnerability response process. See the IBM Security Vulnerability Management (PSIRT) site for details: https://www.ibm.com/trust/security-psirt   Does this process enable immediate notification to Company? If not, please specify the duration for Company to be notified.yes, IBM Cloud follows the IBM Product Security Incident Response Team (PSIRT) process for security incident management. IBM PSIRT is the centralized process through which IBM customers, security researchers, industry groups, government organizations, or vendors report potential IBM security vulnerabilities. To help protect our customers, IBM does not publicly disclose or confirm security vulnerabilities until IBM has conducted an analysis of the product and issued fixes and/or mitigations. A global team manages the receipt, investigation and internal coordination of security vulnerability information related to all IBM products and websites. This team then coordinates with each individual IBM product and solution team across the world to investigate, and if needed, identify the appropriate response plan. Maintaining communication between all involved parties, both internal and external, is a key component of IBM's vulnerability response process. See the IBM Security Vulnerability Management (PSIRT) site for details: https://www.ibm.com/trust/security-psirt. IBM has implemented the the notification requirement from GDPR.    Perconal Information Securityyes,  Does the Supplier or Third Party adhere to an Information Security Policy or Standard and/or Information Handling Policy or Standard, and/or Acceptable Usage Policy or Standard?yes, https://www.ibm.com/us-en/privacy Is there a process in place to identify any foreseeable internal and external information security risks to Company's personal information and such a process will also ensure the implementation of the required mitigation actions to address such risks?yes, https://www.ibm.com/support/pages/ibm-privacy Are security requirements for e-communications (e.g. email) addressed in the above mentioned policy or standard?yes, https://www.ibm.com/us-en/privacy Is there a policy/process for identity and access management, which will apply to Company's personal information?yes, Yes. The IBM cloud Identity and Access Management processess and policies are applicable only to Company employees developing and administering the proposed solution.  Is access to physical storage and/or information systems containing Company's personal information (including development and testing enviroments) restricted to authorised individuals?yes, Yes. During the Co-creation of the solution certain restricted  IBM personnel will require access to an agreed sample of Company documents. When the solution is deployed, only Company personnel will have access to the documents/data Where Company's personal information may be processed in paper-based formats by the Supplier or Third Party, has the Supplier or Third Party implemented physical security controls?yes, NA Are there security controls in place when transferring Company's personal information on a cross-border basis or to other legal entities within the Supplier or Third Party's organisation (e.g. subsidiaries, legal entities, joint ventures)?yes, Yes. Data transmission between IBM and Company is encrypted Are there security controls in place with any agents, sub-contractors and other third parties that may process Company's personal information?yes, NA Are there security controls in place to address risks associated with mobile or remote working facilities; and removable media(e.g USB's) involved in the processing of Company's personal information?yes, Mobile storage devices are strictly controlled and USB ports are only granted for data access under exceptional conditions. Are there security controls in place to prevent unauthorised access to data backups containing Company's personal information?yes, Only Company has access to Company data in backups Are there security controls in place to protect Company's personal information that is stored in systems and applications?yes, Only Company has access to personal information (data) storedin systems and applicationsail ]  Is Company's personal information anonymised, masked or scrambled during development and testing undertaken by the Supplier or Third Party?yes, Due to the nature of the specific business use cases in play, masking of data is not feasible (scanned images of documents) The answer to this is dependent on the application requirements.  The ability to do this exists.  Will Company's personal information be encrypted?yes, once data has been extracted from the images, it is transmitted in encrypted form only If the Supplier or Third Party handles or processes payment card information on behalf of Company, does the Supplier or Third Party comply with the PCI-DSS standard?yes, NA Is data privacy training( including training on privacy legislation) and awareness provided to employees and contractors involved in the processing of Company's personal information? Morover is such training mandatory and employee completion rates tracked?yes, Yes. all IBM employees undergo and certify mandatory data privacy eduction on an annual basis If the Supplier or Third Party is confirmed as a  Processor  or  Sub-Processor ( as a result of answering  yes  to question 7 in the Materiality Section); will the Supplier or Third Party agreed to and therefore incorporated into the agreement with FirstRand, the terms from Annexure A in the Company Data Protection Policy for Suppliers?yes, Yes. Language addressing this questions would be spelled out in the terms document.